First of all, your origins as a writer, it seems to me that you could have probably gone
either way, back either mainstream or science fiction, like back in the mid-60s, the first
two novels I've located of yours, the Solarians and the Men in the Jungle.
Yeah, those are my first.
Yeah, Solarians or Science Fiction.
Solarians or Science Fiction and the Men in the Jungle was not, correct?
Wrong.
Oh, Men in the Jungle is?
Yes.
Okay, okay, I didn't find the book.
I just read somebody who said it was.
No, it's a Science Fiction novel.
It has a lot of relevance to Vietnam and stuff like that was going on at the time, but it
is a Science Fiction novel.
It's not the same kind of hardcore Science Fiction that's Solarians is.
It takes place on another planet and everything, but it's a political Science Fiction novel.
Okay, my question would still have some validity though.
I was going to ask, you must have wondered whether you should pick up Science Fiction
or whether you should go into the so-called mainstream.
Was that ever a choice you made?
I have actually written three mainstream novels, two of which have been published.
One is The Passing Through the Flame, which was a novel about, among other things, Drugs
Smuggling Hollywood, the record business movies, and another one, which is the current one
this year, is called The Mining Game, which is about cults.
Then there's a third book called The Children of Hamlin, which was written in 69 and never
published as a book for various political reasons.
It was serialized in Los Angeles Free Press in 28 installments, about 70 or 71.
It's just now going to be published next year by an outfit called Pequot Press in Los Angeles.
It's sort of like resurrecting a book that I thought I would never sell.
It was sold in England.
It was kind of a historical novel about the origins of the counterculture in a way.
I'd read references to that that had never been published.
It was serialized.
The serialization was published.
In the Free Press, it's a big underground newspaper, a quarter of a million people read it in pieces
and more, but for various reasons, no publisher would touch it until now, which is being done by a small press.
I knew you'd written mainstream fiction, obviously, but it never has come down to a choice as to which you were.
I'm telling you on each individual book, it comes down to a choice.
I'm sure I will continue to write fine fiction novels.
I'm sure I will also continue to write mainstream novels.
I usually never plan more.
I can plan, want to plan, or do plan more than one book ahead.
Whatever the next thing I come up with is the novel I do, and sometimes it's science fiction, and sometimes it isn't.
What I've actually written is seven science fiction novels and three mainstream novels.
Okay.
One of your earlier ones, the Agent of Chaos.
Was that probably your first successful novel?
Depends on what you mean by success.
Reputation, sales.
Not much in sales, because it's a very strange book.
That book was published by an author called Belmont, which the less said the better.
It's never been out of print.
I thought it... yeah, go ahead.
It's never been out of print. It's never had a tremendous number of printing, but it's better.
It's in all that has had a lot of political effect and has created various movements down through the years.
Still continuing to do so, and I don't even know all of the ramifications of what it's created.
It was the inspiration for the Zippies, for the Pie Kill movement, for certain political groups in Europe,
and now there's another group in Washington that I just got in contact with,
which calls itself something for paradoxical politics, which also uses that book.
So I guess that was the first book that had that kind of social and political impact.
Yeah, I thought it was... compared to some of your other work, I thought it was fairly traditional and style and plot.
It had the good guys and the bad guys, and at the end there was the hope of alien contact within the betterment of humanity and so forth.
I'd heard it called an underground classic on college campuses and so forth.
That's why it's called an underground classic because it was involved and inspired a lot of counter-cultural political movements.
It uses a manual, but also I have heard from various people that it's a popular book in prisons.
Hmm.
Okay, Boog Jack Barron, I guess, is one of your better known books.
I thought that Jack was a little different type of hero than most of your others.
He's more of an anti-hero, a wenching, cursing, power-hungry kind of individual.
To me, that was very non-traditional, maybe even a little shocking for a normal science fiction reader.
Did you mean for the book, and Jack to shock people?
Well, I mean, there are two diverse reactions to the character of Jack Barron.
One is that he's an anti-hero, and the other is that he's a real...that he is a hero.
What I was trying to do with the character of Barron, among other things, was...
For me, Barron is not an anti-hero. Barron is a guy who's involved with power, but he has an ambivalent feeling about it.
In other words, he has a sense of personal irony about his own desire for power, and as the book opens,
he's become a TV star because he wants to get out of chasing after power and just wants to be a star.
Then he gets pulled back into it by an in-sounds sign.
Actually, what I was trying to do in a way that the book has a very traditional plot,
as far as I was concerned, it has a positive hero, it has a negative villain,
the hero wins, the villain loses, all that stuff that is considered the traditional way of plotting a book.
Yet, it's written in a different kind of way. It kind of takes that superficial kind of plot and treats it in a realistic manner.
Who's accused a lot of people.
What was the flap in the parliament about that novel?
That novel had a lot of trouble. It was written under contract at double day.
Then it rejected it.
As you have to remember, the political climate of the era.
They didn't reject it. They said,
well, if you cut out all the sex, all the swear words, and all the politics, which is the whole book.
So it took a long time to resell that book here.
In the meantime, I took it to Milford, to a Milford conference, and Mike Murcock was there.
He read it, and he locked it, and he serialized it in New World.
So the first publication was actually in England, in the magazine.
Now, halfway through the serialization, I forget exactly which part, part three, part four,
W. H. Smith, which was the biggest distributor in England, refused to distribute the magazine because of the book in it.
Now, at that time, New World had an arts council grant.
The arts council was an organ of the British government.
Now, the arts council supported the magazine against Smith publicly.
And so the flap in Parliament arose when certain right-wing members of Parliament were aghast that an organ of the British government, the arts council, was defending this kind of stuff.
And that's how it became a parliamentary issue.
Okay. I always thought that the British exercised more tolerance.
They did. Well, that's the whole point.
In other words, the arts council is an organ of the government itself, and the government successfully fought private censorship in a book.
The government, an organ of the government in a way, the arts council, supported the freedom of the press and supported the magazine and supported the book.
The people in Parliament who objected to this were right-wing members of Parliament who were aghast what the government was doing to preserve free press.
So it doesn't reflect at all badly on the English attitude or even on the attitude of the government at the time, just on the attitude of a certain faction in Parliament who felt that the government shouldn't be acting this way.
Okay. One other question I had on that one.
Maybe my reaction to Jack as an antihero was a little off here, but I saw the book more as a comment on the power of the media and the power of politics rather than a crusade or a didactic treatise or something of that sort.
Would I be right in that response, do you think?
Well, you'd be right in that. And also, I mean, the book is about power itself as neutral as far as I'm concerned. It's what people do with it that counts.
Baron is a guy who likes power, he keeps referring to it as a drug and knows that he can become addicted to it.
And for that reason, he decided to stay away from it. Then he gets drawn back into playing with power because he comes to the conclusion that it's better for somebody who feels that way about power to be wielding it than people who don't have any self-consciousness about the dangers of wielding power.
So in that sense, it's a comment on the power of the media, but it's also a comment on the morality of power, on the paradox of power, which is that if you leave power to be wielded by people who do not see the dangers, the personal dangers, the psychological dangers of being involved with it,
then you end up with people like Benedict Howard, Ronald Reagan and Richard Nixon, who do not have self-consciousness about the personal dangers, the moral dangers of chasing after power, whereas somebody like Baron, who is certainly an imperfect person, as old people are,
at least his saving grace, if he has one, is that he is well aware of the personal dangers of being involved in a quest for power.
Okay, good. One thing I've been impressed about when I was reading through your work is the different styles that you use. The Iron Dream, I think, is one that particularly fascinated me. Sturgeon, in the introduction to that book, called it a unique book, belonging to a category all its own.
Did you have fun writing that book? Was it hard to change your style to sort of write down?
I accepted the end where I wrote the scholarly demolition in a book, because in order to write that book, I had to write like Hitler. And in order to get to that point, I had to read everything that Hitler had written, which is very boring indeed.
And I had to also read a book called Hitler's Dinner Conversations, like 800 pages of Hitler's babbling to the dinner table, which was taken down to short end by Martin Borman, a fascinating book.
But in order to write the bulk of that book, Hitler's novel, and signed the book, I had to write like Hitler. I had to get inside Hitler's head. That was not what I could consider a fun experience.
In other words, it was like playing a role. You had to put yourself inside his head.
Yeah, I call that method writing, kind of. Exactly like that. And so it was a very difficult book to write, and kind of a shattering book to write, because of the kind of position I put myself in.
Also, of course, Hitler was a terrible writer. In order to be accurate, I really had to write something awful in a way. And I was trying to, you know, also Hitler was getting crazier and crazier as he's writing the book.
So I got crazier and crazier, so I was writing the book, which was necessary in order to write the book in the first place.
Okay, look, David's got to do something to the tape. Let's stop for just a second here.
We're rolling again.
Yeah. Just a little bit more on that book. Where did the impetus come from? Why did you start to do that thing?
We're on the impetus came from our conversation with Mike Warcock in London, where I was living at the time, about how he wrote Sword and the Sorcery, and how he used Freudian imagery, and the basic appeal of sword and the sorcery.
And that gave me the idea that if Hitler had not become a Fuhrer of Germany, he could have as well winded up writing Sword and the Sorcery.
And I've always been fascinated with the whole question of how a thing like Nazism could really happen.
None of the stuff I had read about that really satisfied me, you know, political or economic or conventional explanations of how this happened.
And the two things came together, and I, you know, had my insight about Nazism was that it was a psychosexual phenomenon that Hitler came to power by, in effect, manipulating imagery.
And psychosexual substructures, rather than bio-coherent economic program and so forth.
So that was the basis. And then, you know, this had a certain correlation with certain kinds of sword and sorcery, and that was the basic impetus that generated the book.
Has anyone really misunderstood that book and called you a fascist or anything like that?
No, really, really. Actually not, really. The book is going to be published in Germany next year. I don't know what's going to happen then.
No, the only kind of misunderstanding that I read in the review that I really got was a little bit different.
It was somebody who said, well, this is really, really good fun, you know. I really enjoyed this book.
Why do we have to muck it up with all this stuff about Hitler and all the extraneous paraphernalia?
It was just a good, you know, rousing adventure tale.
Yeah.
That was, that is the only kind of misreading that's really taken place.
Actually, I have not been called an officer or a fascist by anyone that I know of in connection with that book.
After you published that book, if I'm reading your schedule of writing correctly from 72 to about 79 when you published The World Between, you didn't do any science fiction?
Well, yes and no. I mean, The World Between was written about 77 or 78, 77, I guess, 76, 77.
And because of various publishing screw-ups, it took a while to come out.
But after I wrote The Orange Dream, my next book was Passing Through the Flame, which was a very long mainstream novel.
Then I actually wrote another mainstream, see the schedule of everything was screwed up.
I wrote Passing Through the Flame after The Orange Dream.
Then I wrote another mainstream novel called The Mind Game, which just came out this August due to various publishing screw-ups.
And then I wrote A World Between.
So there were two mainstream books in between in terms of what I, you know, which came out in different order.
But that was the order in which they were written.
Well, A World Between was the next science fiction novel, though, after The Orange Dream that I wrote.
Okay. I thought maybe you'd gotten tired of science fiction or something.
Well, I did. I had gotten tired of science fiction a while.
I did write two mainstream books in between.
Okay.
Right along ones.
Okay. The World Between.
Again, I'm not sure of my ground here, but The World Between and Songs from the Stars.
I see those as sort of a different old kind of writing for you, sort of a mellowing down.
In Songs from the Stars and the World Between, both you have a, the conflict is between extremes.
And then you sort of advocate a medial position, a gray area, as the proper place to be.
Would that be a correct response to those?
Well, I think that'd be a correct response to A World Between.
I'm not so sure about Songs from the Stars.
I think, again, this is all, you know, I guess what I'm getting at you now is books about the fallacy of dualistic thinking.
And I think that's part of what Songs from the Stars is more about.
It's not that, in Songs from the Stars, I think the position, you know, the ultimate positive position that is shown is not so much a position in between the two conflicting signs, but one that transcends both of them.
That's in a much larger context.
I would say in general that up until, I guess, A World Between really, a lot of my stuff was kind of critical of this, of existing societies, critical of various things that were going on.
A World Between is meant as a utopian novel, really, in any kind of way.
And it's a prescriptive kind of book.
It's more of a, instead of presenting critical images of other things, the idea is to create a more positive image of a more positive kind of future.
I think if you spend enough time criticizing what exists, at some point you have some kind of moral obligation to present something more positive and replace what you find negative.
Yeah, that's maybe the way I should have said it instead of mellowing.
Yeah, I recognize for the first time I can see you advocating some things rather than criticizing.
Okay, in The World Between, would you say that Carlotta and Royce would describe your, I guess, your ideal male-female relationship, equality and all that?
Well, yes and no. It's a relationship that it passed in the book.
In other words, the problem with writing a utopian novel is being too diagrammatic about it, being too black and white about it, having all the positive characters be all positive, having what you want to show as a positive relationship, being a perfect relationship.
And I don't think I was trying not to do that there.
The way it comes out comes out that way, and I think that is a positive relationship, but I would want to say that it's perfect.
I mean, in the beginning of the book, it's a little bit of a reverse, a subtle kind of reverse of present things.
In other words, Royce is subtly a little downshodden in the beginning and sort of gains a truer and less superficial equality as the book progresses.
Okay, the Institute for Transcendental Science, obviously, is one of the extremes in the book. Where would you say their error was exactly?
Well, I think...
Well, their error...that's a complicated question, but I think basically there are two areas of error in transcendental science.
One is the unexamined, subtle male chauvinist bias of their culture.
And the other one is the ultimate conviction that what they are doing is the absolute most important thing in the universe,
and that therefore they are morally entitled to run over other people's cultures and desires.
Absolutism, I guess, would be the kind of theocratic absolutism would be their flaw.
Not the faulty thing at all because I do see faulty here.
Okay, every once in a while I detect in your work a tendency to identify a character or a movement with an actual person.
Was I correct in picking out the name Shockley as the founder of that thing?
That was meant as a...
Well, it was thrown in there, but it wasn't meant as a direct reference to Shockley.
However, you can read that stuff into there.
I don't know.
In another book I named a character after the Wolfman in that movie.
Now I can't remember his name, but it was a subconscious thing that I did.
I don't think that was a direct reference to that.
Okay, the femocrats in that book, the Femocracy, do you get any feedback from Women's Lib on something like that?
The strange thing about the reaction to that book has been that a certain number of men have reacted in a kind of male liberal guilt,
male feminist kind of reaction against that.
But at most part women have liked the book.
Women have identified with it more than men.
And actually I even got one or two good reviews in feminist places.
I think that's not quite what I expected, but that seems to be the way it happened.
I have not gotten heavy feminist flak from that a little bit, but not much.
Not much because I think women who are involved in feminism or have been or know women who are can recognize a certain aspect of the feminist movement.
In the femocrats, whereas men who are trying to show how liberated they are would not dream of admitting such a thing.
Whereas women have had experience with that kind of mentality.
I didn't expect the reaction to be that way.
I expected it to be reversed, but that's not the way it was.
Okay, I'd like to move on to songs from the stars.
We fortunately got a whole copy of that guy you put us on to, John Douglas sent one.
Just a personal response first of all.
I think that's a nebula book.
I think it deserves the award.
One never knows what wins the nebulas.
Well, I don't know what your response to an award like that is anyhow, but I was...
You know, my response to an award like that is it's nice to get awards and you make money by being able to put awards on your books, but...
You can see what's won and what hasn't.
You can't take it as a very serious literary judgment.
Anyhow, just from my personal standpoint, I thought it was your best novel.
The way I read this is you said a few words about it before, but it was almost to me a plea for people to join hands to meet the challenge of the future.
You have almost a fairy tale or with a hero, a heroine, a world in danger, alien contact, the future hanging in the balance.
Did you mean to echo those kinds of traditional themes?
Make it that kind of a story?
Well, I don't know. I think...
I don't think that's exactly what I was trying to...
You know, it's not good to ask writers what they're trying to do in that sense, because any book that's any good, you're really writing it half out of your subconscious, and you're not planning every aspect of...
Everything, thematic aspect of what people later read into it.
Again, it's a book against duality. You have two fragmented societies.
They're both kind of like half societies, or the Aquarian Society.
There's a very nice thing that works, except it really only works because it accepts something from the black scientists, which it doesn't want to admit that's accepted.
And the black scientists are, again, another kind of absolutism, which doesn't sell.
It's a book about horror unity, I guess, rather than that the conflict is really superficial.
And then, you know, it mirrors the present thing in our society, where on the one hand you have a great big space movement,
and people want to get into space, and all the Neil people and all that stuff,
and on the other hand you have a real adivistic Neoludite movement, an anti-nuclear movement, which is really kind of willfully ignorant of a lot of things.
In a way, these are the two things that could bring about the crash, as well as what with the environment.
So I think it's basically a book about the grand philosophical attempt at that book,
is to try and bridge the gap between science and reason, and feeling emotion and mysticism,
and to point to a horror unity between the two things, and away from the false dichotomies and false dualisms,
which seem to be really destroying Western civilization. That's a large statement.
Okay, yeah, I can accept that. The higher unity you talk about, I would relate that somehow, the way that clear blue-loo follows,
and the songs that represent alien contact, he sort of blends his way, the earthly one, into sort of a galactic one.
Do you think we're going to meet helpful creatures like the aliens in that book that you...
Well, I do believe that any civilization that's going to last a million years,
it's going to be a million years or whatever, or even a hundred thousand years more advanced than us,
they've been around that much longer, had that much more advanced science.
If it's going to survive to that length of its own history, it's got to be by that time philosophically and emotionally pretty together,
or long since it destroyed itself. I mean, we certainly will not survive a million years of our own history if it continues as it has, you know?
Obviously not. So yeah, I think the idea that advanced aliens can be malignant is very dubious.
I mean, you follow what I'm saying?
Yes.
In order that any civilization that survives a million years of its own history has had to have gotten its political, psychological, and philosophical act together.
And I don't see why, you know, and I do believe that if and when we run into that kind of really advanced civilizations,
that they will, if not be directly actively helpful, certainly will be benign and will not be interested in either eating us or conquering our planet or blowing us up or anything like that.
Okay, David needs to stop it.
Okay.
I sort of know the answer to this question already because you made it kind of plain, but just for the listeners on the show,
the alien races that are contacted the songs, you portrayed all of these people, you know, civilizations, galaxies away being destroyed,
and then you let Lou and Sue know that. Wouldn't that cause a futility in their quest, you know, where they're going to unite the earth and go for the stars?
If they know that any civilization, even that advance, is going to end?
Well, yes and no, I suppose. I mean, that is the existential position of all people, really, and the timeframe of talking about is millions of years.
Well, everybody already knows that the lifespan of the universe, of the sun, of whatever is fine.
You know, I didn't want it to be a pink bunny rabbit story, and that is why I put that in there.
No, I mean, it kills, you know, it kills hunker. You can't take it, they can, because they can deal with that existential reality as those other civilizations could.
Okay. This is sort of a general question. It refers to songs from the stars, but also your other works.
You, in the way you treat the media, I think almost every novel you've read has had something to do with the media.
I take it that you would be having an ambivalent attitude toward the use of the media.
If it's done properly, it's great. If it's used for the wrong kind of power, it's bad.
Like Sue, for instance, uses it to sort of make a media hype, you know, where they dress up the harker as an alien and try to sell it to the people.
In other words, if it serves a good purpose, also like in the electronic democracy in a world between, media is a good thing if it's used properly.
Would that be a...
Yeah, well, media is a powerful, it is a powerful tool. It's a very powerful tool.
It's the most powerful political tool ever invented, among other things.
And my attitude towards that is the same as my attitude towards power. Power is morally neutral. The media is morally neutral.
It all depends on what you do with it. People do good things. People do bad things.
There are tools that don't do good things or bad things. This is just a very, very powerful tool.
So I've written books in which it's used for good and I've written books in which it's used for evil.
And I've written books in which it's used for both.
And you'd probably say the same thing about the treatment of science. This is just a tool like the media.
Yeah, science is... if you look... maybe that's the ultimate... maybe that's what's ultimately wrong, the era of transcendental science is that they look...
is looking to science as a moral guide or as a... as a... you know, as a guide for the answer to philosophical or personal or emotional quest.
I don't think science is supposed to be that at all.
Contrary to what I don't think that people's emotions or feelings or... or fears are very good.
It's not a guide to scientific research either. I think science is there to get out factual truths and...
and to create instrumentalities of physical power and that's what it does. And it's not... it's... again, it's morally neutral.
It's what people do with it that counts. But if you try and make science into a philosophy, science itself becomes your philosophy,
then you really have an empty philosophy because science is not designed or meant to deal with more philosophical questions than that one.
Okay, one... one episode you had, it was a minor one, but it was in the world between it impressed me.
It's a world between.
Oh, I'm sorry, right. In a world between. You've called this sort of utopia novel already, at least on Pacifica, the planet.
Royce's flying boat, he's out there... he's out there sailing, first of all, looks like a regular sailing boat
and it's an idyllic scene in the islands and the ocean and stuff.
Then when he has to get back, it becomes a supersonic flyer in a matter of minutes.
That kind of blend of technology and, you know, the clean blue world was...
I took that as a, you know, sort of a meaningful thing. I'm not sure you meant it that way or not.
Well, I meant it that way. I mean, for... for... on Pacifica, transportation is aesthetic, you know.
In other words, if you're going to have to spend time traveling, in some ways you must well enjoy it.
That's what I hate to 55 mile an hour speed one.
I enjoy driving good cars fast, among other things like that.
Yeah, I don't think that technology is the enemy of, you know, of a clean, well-run world far firmer.
Again, science is a tool, if you understand it completely.
And so many people call themselves ecologists, as if it's a philosophy or a political orientation
when it's really a name for a certain branch of science, of which these people know nothing.
And, you know, the only way that you can... that you can have an ecologically sound, you know, soundly managed planet is by...
by having a scientific knowledge of what that takes and what it is.
And by using the necessary technology to have a good human environment that doesn't conflict with having a good natural environment.
Okay, I feel I'm most obligated, somewhere in this interview, to ask you a question.
I'm sure you've had many times before, but just a little bit about the so-called new wave thing.
You know, I've read your views on it, and I admire very much what you had to say in that...
your introduction to modern science fiction and so forth.
What about just a question like, what caused the new wave to happen?
Was it a social thing, a social unrest, Vietnam, mainstream authors switching to science fiction?
Was there something social that would cause that kind of shift in emphasis in the field of science fiction?
No, I think it was a shift in emphasis.
I think it was simply that prior to that, there was a very...
there were... there were stylized rules of what could be written, what couldn't be written in science fiction,
which were caused by a variety of things, but one by the fact that science fiction was perceived by librarians as juvenile literature.
So that meant you could... you had certain limitations in sex.
There was an unconscious assumption that you had to be positive about science.
There was a whole set of... of stylizations and formulas around the field,
and for two generations, the science fiction writers had come into the field through fandom and through reading other science fiction.
In the 60s, a lot of people came into the field from various different directions that weren't the same as the one unified direction.
So people... kids started writing science fiction up to a lot of people.
They had very little in common with each other except that they were not wedded to the old traditional way of doing things.
And of course, this mirrored the cultural climate at the time.
It mirrored what was happening politically, it mirrored what was happening in music,
it mirrored what was happening in movies.
It was a phenomenon that went through the western civilization as a whole.
So in a sense, it was a reflection of that.
Another sense was one of the things that caused that because it happened fairly early.
In another way, it was something that was really catalyzed by Mike Morkock,
who was a very pivotal figure in the whole thing without Mike Morkock.
None of it might have happened.
So it's a mistake to say that this was a school of writing or a style of writing or any one thing it wasn't.
It was a breaking of the old conventional parameters.
So the people who felt their toes are being stepped on because these parameters were being broken,
tried to identify various entirely different things that were breaking the old parameters as one thing,
as the new way that they could then attack.
It was ridiculous. Anybody that could have attacked Michael Morkock as a nihilist was insane
because Mike was the idealist of the age kind of thing.
He was pumping his own money into this thing.
He really had strong, idealistic beliefs and then it cost him about 20,000 pounds.
And Mike was anything but a nihilist.
Usually people who call other people nihilists are really saying,
this person violates my beliefs, therefore he believes in nothing because he doesn't believe in what I believe in.
And that's what really happened.
There was an old way but there was never as a coherent philosophy in school of science fiction,
but there was never a new way in the same sense.
There were a lot of ways. There were a lot of different people doing a lot of different things.
The people that were identified as new way were very diverse.
What I was actually writing is very different to say what Tom Dish was writing or Boulard or Zalassny and Delaney
were also identified as new way writers.
This stuff is much more, you know, Zalassny and Delaney and myself, Boulard and all this and Mike,
there were more differences between our work than between our work taking as a talkality and then the old stuff.
There was more difference within the so-called new way than there was within the so-called old way.
There was much more unanimity among the people who were attacking the new way was being a coherent school
than there was among people who were being labeled as a new way.
Okay, great. Yeah, that's the kind of thing we like to hear.
The reading I've been doing of your saying, the locusts and some writing interviews you've had and other publications and so forth,
you seem to be saying that the separation between science fiction and mainstream is sort of an artificial thing
that's been created by publishers and fans and so forth.
Would that be your position? Would that be correct in stating it that way?
Well, I would generalize it more. I think modern American publishing is all categories.
Everything is a category. Science fiction, westerns, bestsellers, literary books, they're all categories.
There's no such thing as a general novel. Everything is packaged in a way to look like something.
How many times do you see a book that comes up that says bestseller? The book has just come out,
but it's labeled the bestseller because that's the category.
There are many unsuccessful bestsellers, strangers that may seem, because they use that as a category.
It means they do a certain kind of package, they promote it a certain kind of way,
and they want a certain kind of book and that's a bestseller.
And a great many things that are called bestsellers flop. So they're not really bestsellers.
Same thing with so-called literary books.
Literary books are packaged in a certain way to appeal to a certain small audience
to draw the attention of the people who do the New York Times book reviews,
and that's a bestseller too. It's not something that's simply been done to science fiction.
It's dental. Every kind of literature is published in the United States today. Everything is a category.
But haven't you said though that, like, I got the impression in one of your columns
that you felt that science fiction wasn't being treated fairly, say, by the book reviewers, the people who could do it?
No, it isn't. It is, you know, as a category, you know, it is treated very unfairly and very cavalierly
than by the powers that be, which is mainly the New York Times book review and the New York Review of Books
and the so-called New York Literary Establishment, which really does have a very heavy effect on the way books are published.
These people, for instance, came down on the American Book Awards,
succeeded in getting science fiction knocked out of the American Book Awards.
A real small clique of people in New York City who felt that it was really bad to have these awards
given to things like science fiction, that it was bad to take it away from a small jury
which they could control and have thousands of people voting for, a very elitist, social fascist bunch of people
who I absolutely no use for, and I'm sure they have no use for me.
Well, they certainly demonstrated that.
I've been mentioned in the New York Times Book Review twice, once when the Iron Dream was in America,
it was a National Book Award Recommendee, and once when I was nominated for American Book Award,
neither of those books, which I was forced to mention because it was news, was ever reviewed in that rank,
and it's kind of the general attitude of these people towards science fiction.
Has a science fiction book or anything close to it ever won or been nominated for consideration for the award that you know of?
Well, a classic case was that the National Book Award, Leslie Fiedler won in my book,
there were only three judges and three judge panel at that time.
Fiedler wanted it considered for the award and it was on the initial list because of him.
The other two judges refused to read it because it was science fiction.
They refused to read it.
So that's how much chance you have of winning one of those awards in competition with others,
but they actually refused to read it.
I didn't find it sound till years later when Fiedler was being interviewed on a Buckley show,
willing Buckley show, and to hold this story, I had no idea that that had happened, but it did happen.
Things may be a little bit different now, but they're probably not.
You're talking sort of packaging and categories here, but you think if this kind of packaging or category approach to literature
were removed that science fiction would among, I don't know, scholarly people or whatever,
it would have a higher reputation or it would be equal to mainstream material?
Well, if categories were removed, there wouldn't be any categories.
People would judge books not on what the content is, but how well it's handled.
I mean, it's pretty, you know, if you come to think, if you think about it, it's pretty unlikely to say that
because you're writing about the future or because you're writing about a world that isn't,
or using speculative material that necessarily all the books that are written that way
would be inferior to contemporary novels in terms of the writing, in terms of how good it is.
And if there weren't any categories, books would be judged on their relative qualities and not on their content.
What about Europe? I understand that you do very well over there, your reputation.
Did they do it differently? I mean, did they categorize that way too?
They do and they don't. France is my best country and that's a good example.
And there, every book is also categorized.
In other words, they have what they call collections. Every publisher has various collections of novels.
They'll have a science fiction collection.
They'll have a collection of so-called mainstream novels or something that is the collection of a particular editor
who even has a name on the collection.
So this collection reflects this editor's taste and it's labeled that way and it's given a name.
So in a sense, everything is categorized.
But there's less approbation between the categories.
Since everything is categorized under a name chosen by the, you know, to identify this line of these,
this bunch of books with the editor was actually editing them.
There's not so much stigma in having a category because everything is that kind of category.
Although everything is categorized, the categories have been more equal.
Also, they give you a lot, you know, they have much more respect.
They seem to, you know, they understand that there's no particular, you know, that a lot of everything is crap.
But there's no particular reason why a science fiction novel shouldn't be as good as anything else.
It's still going to be a science fiction novel. It's that good.
And so while they do still pay attention to categories, they do not automatically discount something because it's science fiction.
It was talking to a friend of mine this morning who was over in Europe a few years ago and he said, you know,
that he'd noticed many books by, you know, you over their translations.
But yet he had not read you over here, which implied to me that you must be better known or at least more appreciated.
I just came back from three weeks in France doing book publicity in Paris.
And the publicity for the record I made there.
You know, I think not only am I, not only do I think that I am more, you know, relatively more known in France than I am here,
but I think that writers in general are more important in France than they are here.
Writing is more literature is more central to the popular culture of France saying that it is the popular culture of the United States in general.
People have a different attitude towards writing and towards writers.
There's a certain generalized American anti-intellectualism anyway.
This does not exist in France.
In other Europe, it's this atmosphere of anti-intellectualism.
And so writers in general are considered more important in France.
And I'm considered more important in science fiction.
It's a different, it's a deep cultural attitude.
I think that reflects partly the fact that my book is more popular there, partly the fact that it's more important to be writer.
Okay, what about just on this question of science, how it's considered by the public and so forth.
Do you think the movies and television hurt the image of science fiction?
I mean, to be treated as a serious literature, do you think they detract or hurt it?
I don't know. I don't think they, not really.
I mean, the image of science fiction in that respect has been very bad anyway.
I don't think the movies really add to the image, but I don't think they detract from it either.
If there are some better, more sophisticated movies, they might help.
As it is, it's just kind of neutral publicity, people more aware that it exists.
I think it's positive and will prove to be positive in the long range,
because a lot of people are being introduced to the imagery of science fiction,
with which they are unfamiliar through these movies.
And if you look at the evolution in the movies, you find that in the earlier science fiction movies,
if you're going into space or whatever, you had to spend like half an hour setting the thing,
this is a spaceship, it takes off from the Earth, people float around it, you know,
and you have to familiarize the audience with all this unfamiliar imagery.
Now they can just start a movie bang right off any galaxy far away.
Boom. Here's a spaceship in the stromo pow, you know,
in other words, the first half hour of the conventional old-time science fiction movie is gone,
because people are now familiar with this imagery.
And I think these movies have brought a lot of new people into familiarity with these images.
They made these images part of the popular culture.
These movies were mainly aimed at kids and adolescents.
And years from now, assuming that these people never read anything,
they'll be ready to read science fiction of a more serious kind,
assuming they're ready to read literature of a more serious kind or a lot,
because they'll be familiar with the material, familiar with the literature,
it won't seem strange and weird to them because they will have grown up with it.
That's why I think magazines, even magazines like Star Wars,
in that sense will have a long-term positive impact.